the United Nations says the humanitarian
situation in gazra is beyond
catastrophic the representative for the
UN population fund has just wrapped up a
week-long visit to Gaza and says the
impact of the conflict on pregnant women
and babies in particular is
Stark what we see in Gaza is that it's
it's a nightmare which is much more than
a humanitarian crisis it is a crisis of
humanity and the situation is beyond
catastrophic the doctors are reporting
that they no longer see normalized baby
no they've not seen a normal sized baby
they don't see them what they do see
though tragically more stillborn births
more stillborn babies and more neonatal
deaths whilst driving up through Gaza
into Gaza City I think what what I what
I took away from that was the looks in
the eyes of the people which the emotion
is truly Indescribable everyone we
passed everyone we spoke to was gone
brail emaciated hungry that everybody
was doing this for
food and that is why every day
especially in the north every day is a
battle for survival the doctors are
reporting that they no longer see
normalized baby Noble they've not seen a
normalized baby they don't see them what
they do see though tragically a more
stillborn births more stillborn babies
and more neonatal
deaths well let's take this on further
we can speak to Dr Brenda Kelly who's a
consultant obstetrician at Oxford
University Hospitals also part of Gaza
medical team of Oxford do doctors who
teach in hospitals and medical schools
in Gaza joins us now from Oxford H Dr
Kelly thanks for joining us it is an
unspeakable situation in Gaza as we've
just been hearing young lives just well
just fading away before they've barely
lived what are you hearing about how
desperate the situation
is well it's everything that you've just
heard from the previous speaker I mean
pregnant and new mothers are absolutely
struggling to keep themselves and their
newborns alive amidst huge critical
shortages of food water and and medical
care and actually just able trying to
Able or just get to hospitals for the
the two that are in existence at the
moment in Middle Zone Gaza and also in
Rafa um the level of malnutrition is
truly horrific um ought to re reckon
about 90 % of pregnant women do not have
anything close to adequate nutrition um
and you know this is absolutely a
critical time in in a in a person's life
you know being to to actually grow a
baby takes huge resource from the mother
um and we know that many of the women
even prior to this conflict coming into
pregnancy had things like anemia but you
know with the extreme malnutrition it is
absolutely true there are many more
babies being born that are very much
smaller than would be expected um
colleagues on the grind are reporting
the you know huge increase in pre-term
birth as well as growth restriction and
also very sadly a rising number of
miscarriages and still births
right let me just ask you of all what
first of all does the lack of adequate
nutrition do to The Unborn
Child So The Unborn Child requires you
know hu everything from its mother in
order to grow and develop so if you take
for example um severe malnutrition which
is what is happening in Gaza at the
moment we anticipate that a baby is born
much smaller than expected you know it
it can its organs will be there but it
the organs will not function as they
should do that will increase the risk of
stunted growth in childhood that child
will have poorer immunity and therefore
you know the illnesses that we're
hearing about in Gaz at the moment due
to lack of Clean Water um many children
will succumb in those early months weeks
of life but we also know that lack of
adequate nutrition was to a baby in
neutral and we know this from the great
fam in Ethiopia for example in the mid
80s um and we've seen it time and again
throughout other um areas of um of the
world that been affected by conflict
where nutrition has become an issue for
pregnant women that those young babies
grow into children where there is um uh
impairment of their cognitive
development because of the lack
nutrition whilst they were growing in
utro but also in later adulthood there's
much higher rate of things like
cardiovascular disease so the impact at
the moment on these critical shortages
of food water and Aid coming into Gaza
to help you know the population but
particularly the pregnant women has an
impact not just for now but for the next
generation of Palestinian children that
will grow into adults right and so not
only are these these uh children born
weak they have to face the repercussions
throughout life should they survive H
and also I guess once babies are born
then the mothers are unable to
breastfeed in many cases right it's a
huge problem and this is what we're
hearing time and again from friends and
colleagues in the grind um particularly
those who are working at the moment in
Rafa is that you know the the the lack
of adequate nutrition I mean it's the
human race has evolved such that woman
um their physiology is geared towards
survival of them so they can continue to
look after the children they have but
also to go on to have further children
so if a woman herself becomes
malnourished she will not spend
necessary en energy in creating breast
milk and so we have this situation where
woman want to breastfeed is is the
safest way to feed a child in Gaza a
newborn child in Gaza but if they do not
have the breast milk they then become
reliant on formula but we also know that
that there's a huge issue with getting
formula milk into Gaza and distributing
that milk um where it's provided in
powdered form there simply isn't
sufficient access to clean water so then
we get into this very vicious circle of
not only do we have malnourished
newborns and this you know is becoming
you know it's with every news report but
we then have children who will die from
diarrheal illnesses that you know simply
should not be
happening every which way you look it's
just a desperate situation isn't it Dr
Kelly totally desperate it is thank you
so much for telling us about this
important issue that's happening in Gaza
Dr Brenda Kelly from the ox University
Hospitals